reference.md, before:

---
layout: reference
permalink: /reference/
---

## Glossary

{:auto_ids}
blocking
:   samples of similar structure grouped together from both treatment and control
biological replicate
:   parallel measurements of biologically distinct samples that capture random biological variation, which may itself be a subject of study or a source of noise.
factorial design
:   a design that permits testing of multiple variables at once
randomization
:    method to reduce bias and minimize the likelihood of chance altering the results of an experiment
replicability
:   Other scientists start with the same idea and use their own data and methods to produce the same result.
reproducibility
:   Other scientists use the same methods to obtain similar results and can draw the same conclusions. This might also mean that computer code and data are available so that others can redo the same analysis using the same data.
technical replicate
:   repeated measurements of the same sample that represent independent measures of the random noise associated with protocols or equipment.





## External references

### Reproducibility
Collins FS, Tabak LA. [Policy: NIH plans to enhance reproducibility.](https://www.nature.com/news/policy-nih-plans-to-enhance-reproducibility-1.14586) Nature. 2014 Jan 30;505(7485):612-3.

### Experimental design
Fisher RA. , The Design of Experiments , 19606th edEdinburghOliver & Boyd

[ILAR Journal: Design & Statistical Analysis of Animal Experiments](https://academic.oup.com/ilarjournal/issue/55/3)

[Festing & Altman's Guidelines for the Design and Statistical Analysis of Experiments
Using Laboratory Animals](http://www.3rs-reduction.co.uk/assets/applets/Festing_Altman.pdf)

[Gary Oehlert's A First Course in Design and Analysis of Experiments](http://users.stat.umn.edu/~gary/book/fcdae.pdf)

[Principles of Experimental Design by Mark Conaway](http://biostat.mc.vanderbilt.edu/wiki/pub/Main/ClinStat/dox.rm.pdf) looks like a good motivating example that jumps quickly into different study designs.

[Repeated Measures Design by Mark Conaway](http://biostat.mc.vanderbilt.edu/wiki/pub/Main/ClinStat/repmeas.PDF)

[The Analysis Factor: Effect Size Statistics, Power, and Sample Size Calculations](https://www.theanalysisfactor.com/resources/by-topic/effect-size-statistics-power-and-sample-size-calculations/)

[The Analysis Factor: Series on Confusing Statistical Terms](http://www.theanalysisfactor.com/series-on-confusing-statistical-terms/)

[Statistical Rules of Thumb](https://www.amazon.com/Statistical-Rules-Thumb-Gerald-Belle/dp/0470144483)

[Nature Practical Guides](https://www.nature.com/collections/qghhqm/content/practical-guides)

[Nature Points of Significance](https://www.nature.com/collections/qghhqm/pointsofsignificance)

Commit message:

added retracted paper and reference to Gatti DO850 preprint

reference.md, after:

---
layout: reference
permalink: /reference/
---

## Glossary

{:auto_ids}
blocking
:   samples of similar structure grouped together from both treatment and control
biological replicate
:   parallel measurements of biologically distinct samples that capture random biological variation, which may itself be a subject of study or a source of noise.
factorial design
:   a design that permits testing of multiple variables at once
randomization
:    method to reduce bias and minimize the likelihood of chance altering the results of an experiment
replicability
:   Other scientists start with the same idea and use their own data and methods to produce the same result.
reproducibility
:   Other scientists use the same methods to obtain similar results and can draw the same conclusions. This might also mean that computer code and data are available so that others can redo the same analysis using the same data.
technical replicate
:   repeated measurements of the same sample that represent independent measures of the random noise associated with protocols or equipment.





## External references

### Data source
Gatti, D. M., P. Simecek, L. Somes, C. T. Jeffery, M. J. Vincent, K. Choi, X. Chen, G. A. Churchill and K. L. Svenson (2017).
[The Effects of Sex and Diet on Physiology and Liver Gene Expression in Diversity Outbred Mice.](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/01/05/098657.full.pdf+html) bioRxiv.

### Reproducibility
Collins FS, Tabak LA. [Policy: NIH plans to enhance reproducibility.](https://www.nature.com/news/policy-nih-plans-to-enhance-reproducibility-1.14586) Nature. 2014 Jan 30;505(7485):612-3.

### Experimental design
Fisher RA. , The Design of Experiments , 19606th edEdinburghOliver & Boyd

[ILAR Journal: Design & Statistical Analysis of Animal Experiments](https://academic.oup.com/ilarjournal/issue/55/3)

[Festing & Altman's Guidelines for the Design and Statistical Analysis of Experiments
Using Laboratory Animals](http://www.3rs-reduction.co.uk/assets/applets/Festing_Altman.pdf)

[Gary Oehlert's A First Course in Design and Analysis of Experiments](http://users.stat.umn.edu/~gary/book/fcdae.pdf)

[Principles of Experimental Design by Mark Conaway](http://biostat.mc.vanderbilt.edu/wiki/pub/Main/ClinStat/dox.rm.pdf) looks like a good motivating example that jumps quickly into different study designs.

[Repeated Measures Design by Mark Conaway](http://biostat.mc.vanderbilt.edu/wiki/pub/Main/ClinStat/repmeas.PDF)

[The Analysis Factor: Effect Size Statistics, Power, and Sample Size Calculations](https://www.theanalysisfactor.com/resources/by-topic/effect-size-statistics-power-and-sample-size-calculations/)

[The Analysis Factor: Series on Confusing Statistical Terms](http://www.theanalysisfactor.com/series-on-confusing-statistical-terms/)

[Statistical Rules of Thumb](https://www.amazon.com/Statistical-Rules-Thumb-Gerald-Belle/dp/0470144483)

[Nature Practical Guides](https://www.nature.com/collections/qghhqm/content/practical-guides)

[Nature Points of Significance](https://www.nature.com/collections/qghhqm/pointsofsignificance)
