_episodes/09-randomized-designs.md, before:

---
# Please do not edit this file directly; it is auto generated.
# Instead, please edit 09-randomized-designs.md in _episodes_rmd/
title: "Completely randomized, randomized block, and Latin square designs"
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "What are my experimental units?"
- "How will treatments be assigned?"
- "How will treatments be blinded?"
- "How will outcomes be measured?"
objectives:
- ""
- ""
keypoints:
- "."
- "."
source: Rmd
---




~~~
library(downloader)
url <- "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/genomicsclass/dagdata/master/inst/extdata/mice_pheno.csv"
filename <- "mice_pheno.csv"
if(!file.exists(filename)) download(url,destfile=filename)
~~~
{: .language-r}


~~~
library(dplyr)
dat <- read.csv("mice_pheno.csv") #Previously downloaded 

controlPopulation <- filter(dat,Sex == "F" & Diet == "chow") %>%  
  select(Bodyweight) %>% unlist

hfPopulation <- filter(dat,Sex == "F" & Diet == "hf") %>%  
  select(Bodyweight) %>% unlist

mu_hf <- mean(hfPopulation)
mu_control <- mean(controlPopulation)
print(mu_hf - mu_control)
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 2.375517
~~~
{: .output}



~~~
print((mu_hf - mu_control)/mu_control * 100) #percent increase
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 9.942157
~~~
{: .output}
> ## Challenge 1
> Use this subset of data containing 20 males and 20 females and
> their baseline body weights to randomize to two different diets: high fat and regular chow.
> 1). Perform a complete randomization.  
> 2). Perform a balanced randomization. 
> 3). Check the sex ratio and difference in body weights.
> 4). Share the mean body weight for each group on the course etherpad.
>
> > ## Solution to Challenge 1
> > This requires generation of random numbers.
> > 1). This requires generation of random numbers.
> > This requires generation of random numbers.
> > This requires generation of random numbers.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

Commit message:

updated episodes with Gary's notes

_episodes/09-randomized-designs.md, after:

---
# Please do not edit this file directly; it is auto generated.
# Instead, please edit 09-randomized-designs.md in _episodes_rmd/
title: "Completely randomized, randomized block, and Latin square designs"
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "What are my experimental units?"
- "How will treatments be assigned?"
- "How will treatments be blinded?"
- "How will outcomes be measured?"
objectives:
- ""
- ""
keypoints:
- "."
- "."
source: Rmd
---




~~~
library(downloader)
url <- "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/smcclatchy/dals-inference/gh-pages/data/bodyWeights.csv"
filename <- "bodyWeights.csv"
if(!file.exists(filename)) download(url,destfile=filename)
~~~
{: .language-r}


~~~
library(dplyr)

# Read in DO850 body weight data.
dat <- read.csv("bodyWeights.csv")  

# Select first 20 male and female mice.
controlPopulation <- filter(dat, Sex == "F" & Diet == "chow") %>%  
  select(Bodyweight) %>% unlist
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
Error in FUN(X[[i]], ...): object 'Bodyweight' not found
~~~
{: .error}



~~~
hfPopulation <- filter(dat,Sex == "F" & Diet == "hf") %>%  
  select(Bodyweight) %>% unlist
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
Error in FUN(X[[i]], ...): object 'Bodyweight' not found
~~~
{: .error}
> ## Challenge 1
> Use this subset of data containing 20 males and 20 females and
> their baseline body weights to randomize to two different diets: high fat and regular chow.
> `subset <- dat[dat$Sample[c(51:70, 475:494)],c("Sample", "Sex", "BW.3")]`
> 1). Perform a complete randomization.  
> 2). Perform a balanced randomization. 
> 3). Check the sex ratio and difference in body weights.
> 4). Share the mean body weight for each group on the course etherpad.
>
> > ## Solution to Challenge 1
> > This requires generation of random numbers. If diets are assigned in order, sample ID will be confounded with body weight.
> > 1). 
> > 2).
> > 3).
> > 4).
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}
